[MUSIC]
In this video, we'll talk about how to
train a classifier to provide flat or
uniform dependency of signal
efficiency on the particle parameters.
Firstly, let's consider how to train
a boosting over decision trees
classifier to provide flat
performance on the set of features.
This example is based on
the AdaBoost classifier.
This classifier uses the loss
function shown on this slide.
In this function, gamma is a true label
of an event, and s is score obtained for
each event as the sum of predictions for
all trees in the series.
To provide the flat classifier
efficiency on a set of features,
we modify the loss function by adding
a new term that is responsible for flatness.
Let's consider how this term works.
Suppose that we would like to provide flat
signal efficiency on a particle momentum.
For that,
we divide the momentum values into bins.
Then for each bin,
we integrate the differences between
the cumulative distribution of
the classifier output in that bin and
the global cumulative distribution
of the classifier output.
And finally, we calculate
the weighted sum over all bins.
Weight of a bin is a fraction
of signal particles in this bin.
This term tries to
minimize the differences
between the global distribution
of the classifier output and
the output distribution in the bins
during the classifier training.
In case of the ideal flatness,
this term is close to zero.
The modified loss function
provides a trade-off between
classifier quality and
classifier output flatness.
The better flatness the worse quality
of particle type identification.
And the balance is determined
by the problem requirements
you solve using such modification.
This is just one possible modification
of the loss function described in
the original paper provided
at the bottom of the slide.
Consider results of these modifications.
The figure on the slide is
provided by the original paper.
It demonstrates dependencies of signal
efficiency from a selected feature,
minimum distance from
the corner in our case.
For several classifiers for
the same global efficiency of 50%.
This global efficiency is
illustrated as a gray line.
Black curve in a figure corresponds
to conventional AdaBoost classifier
without any modifications
of its loss function.
This classifier has strong
dependency of signal efficiency from
the selected feature.
The second curve,
with the name kNNAda,
is also represents a non-flat AdaBoost
classifier but with other loss function.
All other curves correspond to different
flat modifications of AdaBoost classifier.
The results for
the modification described in the previous
slide are shown as the first red curve.
It demonstrates much better flatness
compared with conventional AdaBoost.
Consider how it works in
the particle modification.
This figure shows the dependencies
of the pion efficiency from
its transverse momentum at
the LHCb experiment at CERN.
The figure compares two classifiers for
three different
global efficiencies: 60%, 80% and 90%.
The blue curves correspond
to the uniform boosting,
which is a AdaBoost classifier,
modified as it was
described previously.
And the green curves
correspond to the non-modified
gradient boosting classifier
on decision trees.
The uniform boosting provides
significantly better
flatness of the signal efficiency for
all three global efficiencies.
And the trade-off between
the uniform boosting flatness and
quality was tuned to provide the same
quality as for the non-flat classifier.
In the paper provided at
the bottom of the slide,
you can find plots for
other particle types.
We considered how to modify loss
function for an AdaBoost classifier
to provide flatness of its signal
efficiency on a set of features.
Now let's consider a method which allows
to train a neural network with flat
signal efficiency without any special
modifications of its loss function.
This method is called decorrelation
using adversarial neural network.
The network in this approach
consists of two parts.
The first one, is a classifier
that is trained to predict
a particle type for an example.
This classifier has its own loss
function used for the training.
For an example, binary or
categorical cross-entropy.
So this is just a usual neural network
without any special modifications.
The second part of the network
is an adversary network.
It takes outputs of the classifier for
a particle as inputs and
predicts a particle momentum value,
for example.
The momentum prediction is performed
to using multiclassification
problem instead of the regression one.
For that all particle momentum values
are divided into bins.
And each bin represents a separate class.
Adversary network predicts a bin for
each output of the classifier.
Adversary network also uses
its own loss function, and
in this case, it can be
categorical cross entropy.
To provide flat output of the classifier,
we should minimize concurrently
two loss functions
shown in the slide during
the neural network training.
In case of the particle identification,
the first loss function represents
quality of a particle momentum
reconstruction based on the classifier
output for this particle.
The second loss function represents
quality of the classifier.
But also this function penalizes
the classifier if it's possible
to reconstruct the particle
momentum based on its output.
The lambda in the loss function,
is an adjustable parameter which
defines the trade-off between
the classifier flatness and quality.
Consider how this approach works.
The figure on the slide is
taken from the original paper.
And it demonstrates outputs for
the decorrelated adversarial network,
compared to the traditional
neural network.
Black curve corresponds to the
decorrelated network, and the red curve
corresponds to the traditional neural
network without adversary part.
The decorrelated network
shows much flatter
dependency of its output
from the jet invariant mass.
These two methods of uniform classifiers
were developed for high energy physics.
However, these approaches
can be used in other fields
where dependency of a classifier output
on a set of features is undesirable.
It was last example of flat or
uniform classifiers,
let's make summary of this week.
So we considered an example
of a particle decay and
learned that mass of the mother
particle depends on the energies,
momentum and
masses of the daughter particles.
Tracks of the daughter particles
are needed to check that the particles
originate from the same point,
and belong to the same decay.
Detectors in high energy physics,
and the different systems,
are needed to estimate
a particle trajectory, momentum,
energy, and its type to be able
to recognize particle decays and
reconstruct parameters
of mother particles.
We also considered several of
the most common detector systems
in high energy physics.
The systems are tracking system,
ring-imaging Cherenkov detector,
electromagnetic and
hadron calorimeters and muon system.
All these systems recognize particles,
measure their energy and
momentum and identify their types.
All charge particles have
responses in the tracking
system to reconstruct their tracks and
measures their momentum.
Ring-imaging Cherenkov
detector identify particle
type based on it's track and momentum.
Electrons and photons are stopped by the
electromagnetic calorimeter, which also
measures their energies, other particles
fly farther to the hadron calorimeter.
And hadron calorimeter stops protons,
neutrons and
other particles containing quarks and
estimates their energies.
Muons pass all detector systems and
are detected in the muon system.
Also we saw different cases in high
energy physics experiments where
machine learning can be applied.
Machine learning can be used for
particle tracks pattern
recognition among detector hits and
reject ghost tracks.
Combining tracks into vertices
to recognize particle decays and
to estimate properties
of mother particles.
Machine learning can help to increase
precision of particle momentum
estimation in tracking systems or
to improve ring image recognition
in RICH subdetectors for
better particle type identification.
Particle energy estimation and
neutral particle identification
based on calorimeter responses
are also examples of such cases.
We detailed discussed how different
classifiers can be used for global
particle identification based on responses
of different systems of the detector.
And how to train them to provide
flatness of signal efficiency on
a set of features like particle momentum,
transverse momentum or energy.
Finally, if you would like to get
more information about machine
learning in the high energy physics,
this slide will help you.
It provides a list of references
to different articles and
talks about successful examples.
Thank you very much for
your attention and see you next week.
[MUSIC]